And she sees the struggle of our times as a struggle
for survival and whether we're going to go on to
become that kind of grand human species implicit
in what we already are. It's interesting to those,
I'm sure, people who've had similar experiences
who've taught the book, what students' responses
are to a work like Starmaker. What typically What I
get when I teach it, first of all, there's a lot of
moaning and groaning. I warn people about it. I
say, you know, this is a very difficult work. It
makes tremendous demands on your imagination. I
can only read about 15 or 20 pages of Star Maker at a
time. I just start getting dizzy from the demands
that the book makes on me. So one, you've got to read
this slow. You've got to take your time. You have to
think about it. So you get a lot of complaints. Why
did you sign this book? It's so... long, it's so
slow, there's no plot, there are no characters, et
cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And then every year
that I've taught that book, I also have, right
away, there's a small minority that get very
excited about the book. gradually more people
have won over. And I find later on, months later,
and sometimes years later, when it's not a matter
of currying favor to get a good grade, years later,
people come back to see me and say, you remember
that book by Stapleton that you assigned, Star
Maker? I've never read anything like that. That
book changed my life. It changed the whole way I
look at myself and human beings and where we are,
what we are, and so on. That book changed my life.
Well, how many people who've taught paradise laws
have had a response like that from the students? As
I say, our job is critical. We scholars and critics
of science fiction may help make the choice, and it
is a critical distinction. It is helping to make a
choice. between the values of the futures
exchange and the values of, say, the space
merchants, between starship troopers and the
forever war. Our scholarship and criticism may,
in fact, have an influence on the future that the
human race chooses to create.
Thank you, Bruce. That was a very good speech. And
let me personally thank you, not thank you, but
congratulate you on winning this award, a
well-deserved, well-merited award winner for
our distinguished list of pilgrims. Before we
leave, I want to discuss just one small matter for a
couple of minutes. I wish I would have had the
opportunity today to thank another set of guests
that we invited, but unfortunately they could not
come, and these were the guests from the Soviet
Union. I'd ask for the Strogatzky brothers, of
course. We met Boris in Leningrad last year, and I
had high hopes that, since a number of science
fiction people had gone through, that the
writers' union houses there that they might
reciprocate. And also, that was a means to pry
loose another distinguished Pilgrim winner, a
world specialist, Julius Kargaletsky, one of our
early Pilgrim winners, who was set to come to pick
up his award at Penn State, I believe, wasn't it?
Was that 1972? Around in there? And at the last
moment was sent to Stockholm, I believe, or
someplace like that. And I was hoping this time he
could get here and we could give him a belated
observance for his winning. But he could not come.
As a euphemism, they say he has family troubles. A
member of his family apparently is in disfavor and
that is reflected, of course, on him. So I'm sorry
that our Russian science fiction writers and
critics and editors did not show up. Since some of
us were written up in Pravda last December, I had
high hopes that they would show up. But that was not
the case. And so since I can't thank them for
coming, I will say that I am sorry they couldn't be
here. And perhaps sometime in the future, the
Soviet government may allow us to finally present
our wayward pilgrim. Thank you very much, and have
a good time at the rest of the
meeting.